posts/Data_visualization/Data_Visualization:_Matplotlib_Customization.md, before:

In the [previous post](https://aeryck.com/post:5) we learned the basics of
plotting with matplotlib. Now we'll move onto the second key section,
Customization.

### [Basic plotting](https://aeryck.com/post:5)
### [Customization](https://aeryck.com/post:6)
### [The matplotlib API](https://aeryck.com/post:7)

Let's start with a quick review of basic plotting, this time we'll compare
annual headline consumer price inflation [source: World
Bank](https://www.worldbank.org/en/research/brief/inflation-database) from 2017
to 2022 in the United States and Canada.

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    united_states = [2.14, 2.44, 1.81, 1.23, 4.70]
    canada = [1.60, 2.27, 1.95, 0.72, 3.40]

    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot(united_states)
    ax.plot(canada)
    plt.show()

![United States vs Canada
inflation](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/1.png
"Figure 1: United States vs Canada inflation")

###### We will go over how to properly import datasets, as opposed to simply hard-coding data in future posts.

As it stands, this plot has several problems. It's missing a title, axis
labels, and a legend, making the plot completely meaningless on its own. Fortunately,
customization of plots is a core feature of matplotlib. Let's start by
rectifying these issues.

    ax.plot(united_states, label="United States")
    ax.plot(canada, label="Canada")

    ax.set_title('Inflation in The United States vs. Canada')
    ax.set_xlabel('Year')
    ax.set_ylabel('Percent')
    ax.legend()

    plt.show()

![United States vs Canada
inflation, with labels](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/2.png
"Figure 2: United States vs Canada inflation, with labels")

###### Note we needed to rewrite the ax.plot() lines by adding labels to the data.

This is looking much better, there's one final step in converting this into a
competent plot, and that's converting the numbers of the x-axis to show the
appropriate year, instead of the default 0.0, 0.5, etc.

    years = [2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021]
    ax.plot(years, united_states, label='United States')
    ax.plot(years, canada, label='Canada')
    ax.set_xticks(years)
    ax.set_xticklabels(years)

![United States vs Canada
inflation, with years for x-axis](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/3.png
"Figure 3: United States vs Canada inflation, with years for x-axis")

We've now fully constructed a figure that, if nothing else, at least wouldn't
fail a fourth-grade math class.

Notice that we've once again re-defined the plot() statements, this time with
two positional arguments: years and united_states/canada. When the plot() method
is called with one positional argument, as we've done up until this point, it's
assumed that argument is the y-values of the data to be plotted, and the
x-values are set to len([y]). This is why the x-axis of the earlier plots simply
ranged from 0 to 4.

When called with two positional arguments, the first is set to the x-values, and
the second to the y-values.\*

### Now let's *really* customize

We've seen how add basic supplemental information to a plot, now let's make this
plot truly ours. We can start by changing the lines:

    ax.plot(years, united_states, color='blue', linewidth=2, label='United States')
    ax.plot(years, canada, color='red', linewidth=2, label='Canada')

![United States vs Canada
inflation, lines edited](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/4.png
"Figure 4: United States vs Canada inflation, with lines edited")

To change the line color and thickness, simply specify your desired values when
calling plot(). In fact, not only can you change [just about
anything](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.lines.Line2D.html#matplotlib.lines.Line2D)
about these lines, the same is true for the entire plot!

    # let's set some colorblind-friendly colors
    US_COLOR = '#3182bd' # blue
    CA_COLOR = '#de2d26' # red

    ax.plot(years, united_states, color=US_COLOR, linewidth=2, label='United States')
    ax.plot(years, canada, color=CA_COLOR, linewidth=2, label='Canada')

    # get rid of some clutter
    ax.spines['top'].set_visible(False)
    ax.spines['right'].set_visible(False)

    # add some horizontal gridlines
    ax.yaxis.grid(color='gray', linestyle='dashed')

    ax.set_title('Inflation in the United States and Canada', weight='bold')
    ax.set_xlabel('Year', weight='bold')
    ax.set_ylabel('Percent', weight='bold')

    # add a subtitle
    ax.text(0.5, 0.98, 'Average annual headline consumer price inflation (source: World Bank)', transform=ax.transAxes, ha='center', fontsize=8)

    # adjust interval on x-axis
    ax.set_xticks(years)
    ax.set_xticklabels(years)

    ax.legend(loc='lower left')

    plt.show()

![United States vs Canada
inflation, fully custom](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/5.png
"Figure 5: United States vs Canada inflation, fully custom")

Now **that** is a plot!

There is much more customization you can do; as mentioned, just about everything
can be configured in a matplotlib plot. In the
[next post](https://aeryck.com/post:7) we're going to cover how to use the
matplotlib api to fully unlock our potential!

* * *
### \*BONUS
If your data are already labeled, say in a dict or a pandas dataframe, you can
take advantage of the data parameter in the plot() method. This provides a
more convenient way of inserting the labels into the plot:

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    united_states = [2.14, 2.44, 1.81, 1.23, 4.70]
    years = [2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021]

    us_dict = {'Year': years, 'Percent': united_states}

    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot('Year', 'Percent', data=us_dict)

    plt.show()

![United States inflation](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/bonus.png
"Bonus figure: United States inflation, plotted using obj")

So there is no need to 'pull apart' the data into separate lists for data and
labels.

It's also worth mentioning that matplot lib contains a large number of
'pre-built' styles, so if you want your plot to stand out, but also don't want
to spend time tweaking all the details, you can try one of those! It's as simple
as running

    plt.style.use('classic')

Here are a couple interesting examples:

![Classic](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/classic.png
"Bonus figure: Clasic style")

![Dark Background](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/dark_background.png
"Bonus figure: Dark Background style")

![Five Thirty Eight](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/fivethirtyeight.png
"Bonus figure: Five Thirty Eight style")

![Grayscale](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/grayscale.png
"Bonus figure: Grayscale style")


###### The available styles are: ['Solarize_Light2', '_classic_test_patch', '_mpl-gallery', '_mpl-gallery-nogrid', 'bmh', 'classic', 'dark_background', 'fast', 'fivethirtyeight', 'ggplot', 'grayscale', 'seaborn-v0_8', 'seaborn-v0_8-bright', 'seaborn-v0_8-colorblind', 'seaborn-v0_8-dark', 'seaborn-v0_8-dark-palette', 'seaborn-v0_8-darkgrid', 'seaborn-v0_8-deep', 'seaborn-v0_8-muted', 'seaborn-v0_8-notebook', 'seaborn-v0_8-paper', 'seaborn-v0_8-pastel', 'seaborn-v0_8-poster', 'seaborn-v0_8-talk', 'seaborn-v0_8-ticks', 'seaborn-v0_8-white', 'seaborn-v0_8-whitegrid', 'tableau-colorblind10']

Commit message:

Update: added code link in mpl customizaiton post

posts/Data_visualization/Data_Visualization:_Matplotlib_Customization.md, after:

In the [previous post](https://aeryck.com/post:5) we learned the basics of
plotting with matplotlib. Now we'll move onto the second key section,
Customization.

All the code from this post can be found
[here](https://github.com/erkearney/Aeryck/blob/main/code_posts/data_visualization/2part_matplotlib_examples.py)

### [Basic plotting](https://aeryck.com/post:5)
### [Customization](https://aeryck.com/post:6)
### [The matplotlib API](https://aeryck.com/post:7)

Let's start with a quick review of basic plotting, this time we'll compare
annual headline consumer price inflation [source: World
Bank](https://www.worldbank.org/en/research/brief/inflation-database) from 2017
to 2022 in the United States and Canada.

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    united_states = [2.14, 2.44, 1.81, 1.23, 4.70]
    canada = [1.60, 2.27, 1.95, 0.72, 3.40]

    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot(united_states)
    ax.plot(canada)
    plt.show()

![United States vs Canada
inflation](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/1.png
"Figure 1: United States vs Canada inflation")

###### We will go over how to properly import datasets, as opposed to simply hard-coding data in future posts.

As it stands, this plot has several problems. It's missing a title, axis
labels, and a legend, making the plot completely meaningless on its own. Fortunately,
customization of plots is a core feature of matplotlib. Let's start by
rectifying these issues.

    ax.plot(united_states, label="United States")
    ax.plot(canada, label="Canada")

    ax.set_title('Inflation in The United States vs. Canada')
    ax.set_xlabel('Year')
    ax.set_ylabel('Percent')
    ax.legend()

    plt.show()

![United States vs Canada
inflation, with labels](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/2.png
"Figure 2: United States vs Canada inflation, with labels")

###### Note we needed to rewrite the ax.plot() lines by adding labels to the data.

This is looking much better, there's one final step in converting this into a
competent plot, and that's converting the numbers of the x-axis to show the
appropriate year, instead of the default 0.0, 0.5, etc.

    years = [2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021]
    ax.plot(years, united_states, label='United States')
    ax.plot(years, canada, label='Canada')
    ax.set_xticks(years)
    ax.set_xticklabels(years)

![United States vs Canada
inflation, with years for x-axis](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/3.png
"Figure 3: United States vs Canada inflation, with years for x-axis")

We've now fully constructed a figure that, if nothing else, at least wouldn't
fail a fourth-grade math class.

Notice that we've once again re-defined the plot() statements, this time with
two positional arguments: years and united_states/canada. When the plot() method
is called with one positional argument, as we've done up until this point, it's
assumed that argument is the y-values of the data to be plotted, and the
x-values are set to len([y]). This is why the x-axis of the earlier plots simply
ranged from 0 to 4.

When called with two positional arguments, the first is set to the x-values, and
the second to the y-values.\*

### Now let's *really* customize

We've seen how add basic supplemental information to a plot, now let's make this
plot truly ours. We can start by changing the lines:

    ax.plot(years, united_states, color='blue', linewidth=2, label='United States')
    ax.plot(years, canada, color='red', linewidth=2, label='Canada')

![United States vs Canada
inflation, lines edited](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/4.png
"Figure 4: United States vs Canada inflation, with lines edited")

To change the line color and thickness, simply specify your desired values when
calling plot(). In fact, not only can you change [just about
anything](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.lines.Line2D.html#matplotlib.lines.Line2D)
about these lines, the same is true for the entire plot!

    # let's set some colorblind-friendly colors
    US_COLOR = '#3182bd' # blue
    CA_COLOR = '#de2d26' # red

    ax.plot(years, united_states, color=US_COLOR, linewidth=2, label='United States')
    ax.plot(years, canada, color=CA_COLOR, linewidth=2, label='Canada')

    # get rid of some clutter
    ax.spines['top'].set_visible(False)
    ax.spines['right'].set_visible(False)

    # add some horizontal gridlines
    ax.yaxis.grid(color='gray', linestyle='dashed')

    ax.set_title('Inflation in the United States and Canada', weight='bold')
    ax.set_xlabel('Year', weight='bold')
    ax.set_ylabel('Percent', weight='bold')

    # add a subtitle
    ax.text(0.5, 0.98, 'Average annual headline consumer price inflation (source: World Bank)', transform=ax.transAxes, ha='center', fontsize=8)

    # adjust interval on x-axis
    ax.set_xticks(years)
    ax.set_xticklabels(years)

    ax.legend(loc='lower left')

    plt.show()

![United States vs Canada
inflation, fully custom](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/5.png
"Figure 5: United States vs Canada inflation, fully custom")

Now **that** is a plot!

There is much more customization you can do; as mentioned, just about everything
can be configured in a matplotlib plot. In the
[next post](https://aeryck.com/post:7) we're going to cover how to use the
matplotlib api to fully unlock our potential!

* * *
### \*BONUS
If your data are already labeled, say in a dict or a pandas dataframe, you can
take advantage of the data parameter in the plot() method. This provides a
more convenient way of inserting the labels into the plot:

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    united_states = [2.14, 2.44, 1.81, 1.23, 4.70]
    years = [2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021]

    us_dict = {'Year': years, 'Percent': united_states}

    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot('Year', 'Percent', data=us_dict)

    plt.show()

![United States inflation](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/bonus.png
"Bonus figure: United States inflation, plotted using obj")

So there is no need to 'pull apart' the data into separate lists for data and
labels.

It's also worth mentioning that matplot lib contains a large number of
'pre-built' styles, so if you want your plot to stand out, but also don't want
to spend time tweaking all the details, you can try one of those! It's as simple
as running

    plt.style.use('classic')

Here are a couple interesting examples:

![Classic](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/classic.png
"Bonus figure: Clasic style")

![Dark Background](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/dark_background.png
"Bonus figure: Dark Background style")

![Five Thirty Eight](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/fivethirtyeight.png
"Bonus figure: Five Thirty Eight style")

![Grayscale](static/images/data_visualization/matplotlib/customization/grayscale.png
"Bonus figure: Grayscale style")


###### The available styles are: ['Solarize_Light2', '_classic_test_patch', '_mpl-gallery', '_mpl-gallery-nogrid', 'bmh', 'classic', 'dark_background', 'fast', 'fivethirtyeight', 'ggplot', 'grayscale', 'seaborn-v0_8', 'seaborn-v0_8-bright', 'seaborn-v0_8-colorblind', 'seaborn-v0_8-dark', 'seaborn-v0_8-dark-palette', 'seaborn-v0_8-darkgrid', 'seaborn-v0_8-deep', 'seaborn-v0_8-muted', 'seaborn-v0_8-notebook', 'seaborn-v0_8-paper', 'seaborn-v0_8-pastel', 'seaborn-v0_8-poster', 'seaborn-v0_8-talk', 'seaborn-v0_8-ticks', 'seaborn-v0_8-white', 'seaborn-v0_8-whitegrid', 'tableau-colorblind10']
